% A Companion of Questionable Quality to _Machine Learning: An Algorithmic Perspective_
% R. Dougherty-Bliss
% CSC-490, 2016FA

# Companion Introduction

This document is a partial collection of notes to accompany the second edition
of Marsland's textbook _Machine Learning: An Algorithmic Perspective_. It was
written as a part of an honors course in machine learning I took at Oglethorpe
University.

The different sections of this were written with different intentions. Some of
them are my notes from the lectures in class, while some of them are notes I
prepared for my own "lectures" as a part of the honors class. This gives some
variability to each section. Some sections are bullet points recounting the
text's material, some offer the viewpoint of a different source, and some could
serve as lecture notes.  There is a rough chronological ordering to the notes,
e.g.  Chapter 1 is first, then Chapter 2, etc, but the sections themselves are
not currently numbered here.

_An Algorithmic Perspective_ covers a wide array of topics, provides exercises
and references for further reading, almost always gives an outline of
algorithms and often has implementations available online. There are numerous
examples of algorithms being run, and the text _usually_ manages to stay away
from complicated formalism for introductions.

The presentation in the book could be better. There are enough typos that I
worried what formulas were typed correctly in the book. At times the writing is
verbose, and after pages of text the reader is left wondering what the point
was. At times the opposite is true, and the reader is left to puzzle out how a
mess of equations applies to the problem at hand. I did a lot of flipping
through the book while I read it; both to get to the point of a long-winded
section, and to try and find earlier explanations of mathematical topics.

The mathematics in the book is not pitched at a constant level. As the book
continues, the math tends to get more sophisticated, but the author never takes
the time to explain it all. That is fair, since this is not a math book. I
would say that a good course in linear algebra is a good thing to have to make
it through some of the more sophisticated sections. (At the time I wrote these
notes, I hadn't had one yet. When explaining the math, I made judgement calls
when I had to. Take it with a grain of salt.)

Finally, the book chooses to not use any machine learning libraries. I do not
know if this is good or bad. On the one hand, we see how to build the
algorithms from scratch, without too many optimizations. On the other hand, in
an actual project, I would opt to use libraries like `scikit-learn` over the
code in the book.

Hopefully the notes here will help someone else, even if only to frustrate them
enough to write an even better companion.
