# Random Number Sampling

Sampling from a probability distribution is a key part of any algorithm with
stochastic behavior. Thus, how we get those samples is important.

## The Box-Muller Scheme

Often, we want to sample from a standard normal distribution. If we can sample
from a uniform distribution on $[0, 1]$, we can generate pairs of numbers from
independent standard normal distributions. This is called the Box-Muller
Scheme, and it's pretty simple:

Given two uniformly distributed random variables $U_1$ and $U_2$ on $[0, 1]$,
let $\theta = 2\pi U_1$ and $r = \sqrt{-2 \ln(U_2)}$. Then, $x = r\cos \theta$
and $y = r \sin \theta$ are Gaussian variables with mean zero and standard
deviation one.

The proof of this requires a little bit of multivariate probability theory. The
gist is that, for two independent, standard Gaussian variables $X$ and $Y$,
their product is distributed with density $$f(x, y) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi}}
e^{-\frac{x^2}{2}} \frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi}} e^{-\frac{y^2}{2}} = \frac{1}{2\pi}
e^{-\frac{x^2 + y^2}{2}}.$$ Next, convert to polar, i.e., set $r^2 = x^2 + y^2$
and $\theta = \arctan(y/x)$. If we can sample $r$ and $\theta$ from a uniform
distribution that maintains this relationship, then we can work in reverse to
recover independent Gaussians.

It works out that $\theta$ is uniformly distributed on $[0, 2\pi]$, and $r$ is
on $[0, 1]$. To sample $\theta$, we can pick $\theta = 2\pi U_1$. To sample
$r$, we need to solve $$P(r \leq R) = 1 - e^{-\frac{r^2}{2}} = 1 - U_2,$$ which
works out to be $r = \sqrt{-2 \ln(U_2)}$.

## Proposal Distributions

There is an alternate method to perform the Box-Muller Scheme, which uses the
idea of sampling and rejection.

Let $U_1$ and $U_2$ be uniformly distributed random variables on $[-1, 1]$, and
let $w = \sqrt{U_1^2 + U_2^2}$, so that $$w^2 = U_1^2 + U_2^2.$$ If $w^2 < 1$,
i.e. the point $(U_1, U_2)$ lies in the unit circle, then $$x =
U_1\sqrt{\frac{-2\ln(w^2)}{w^2}}$$ and $$y = U_2\sqrt{\frac{-2\ln(w^2)}{w^2}}$$
are independent, standard Gaussian variables.

This new method can be quicker, but requires that we might have to reject some
points. (What's the probability that we'll have to do that?) The idea of
"sample-and-reject" can be used to sample from arbitrary probability
distributions.
